Title: Consciousness ascription and the narrative self
Date: 2026-03-13
Category: Philosophy

## 1. Clarifying consciousness
Ascription of consciousness (henceforth "Ascription") to others is a strange business, for it seemingly involves inductive reasoning from a single example (myself). Yet calling it an induction is not quite strictly right either, because we do not know what non-consciousness looks like---hence the lingering possibility of panpsychism or zombies.

Of course, there are times when we speak of temporarily losing consciousness, such as light sleep, concussion, or traumatic episodes. We should distinguish between the *first-person* and *third-person* perspectives when talking about such situations. From the first-person perspective, you can never "be unconscious" because "you" are simply not there *by definition*. There is nothing puzzling about this. Yet when we look back to these episodes and notice a curious absence of memory, we infer that this absence is due to the fact *there was nothing to record*. But this is really a third-person inference, drawing from the observation that we were acting with diminished capacity during that time. If we were concussed and yet reasoning fluently, we would simply assume that the damage led to temporary anterograde amnesia, not a suspension of consciousness. 

The root problem with consciousness is that the first-person version is circularly ostensive ("What is consciousness? Just notice it yourself."), while the third-person version does not touch upon the hard problem (Chalmers 1995). Actually, I don't think the hard problem is a problem at all, because there are no criteria for the validity of a solution. I am not saying that whatever is captured by the current usage of the term "consciousness" is non-sensical, only that the strict conception of consciousness as "what it is like to be an *X*" (Nagel 1974) is operationally vacuous. In particular, the *act* of Ascribing is a particularly fascinating phenomenon, because it is central to human social and moral behaviour. In this post, I am interested in the *descriptive* account of this act, and not the normative question of to whom Ascription should extend. 

Although we have the above-mentioned technical issues with treating Ascription as an induction, most people *do* treat it as such, e.g. when we judge our past concussed self. As we are dealing with an $N=1$ induction, that single $N$ is going to be quite important. So operationally speaking, what matters for Ascription is how we internally crystallise the concept of me-ness into tangible signs. In other words, our Ascription to others is mostly a function of Ascription to ourselves, i.e. how we take the structure of our own experience to be.

## 2. Viewing LLMs as narrative selves
To understand how such self-Ascription can differ between people, consider the two senses of selfhood distinguished by Gallagher (2000). (Note that I take Ascription to be an act separable from mind-reading. The latter only pertains to attributing specific mental states, and the former seems to be a higher-level decision to override this attribution or not.) The first is the *minimal self* (or *experiential self*), which is something that is temporally unextended and immediately given. The second is the *narrative self*, which forms under reflection and consists of a relatively coherent narrative of "me". (Hume's bundle theory is an important precursor to this distinction, where self is just an illusionary product of the imagination that unifies the disparate perceptions.) While both selves are fundamental to a normal human consciousness, they seem to be supported by different regions of the brain. (Unfortunately, due to the complexity of the issues involved, one can but hedge every statement here.) Importantly, experiments such as Farb et al. (2007) suggest that the baseline activation of the two selves could vary across individuals, for mindful training seems to decrease the activity in the regions associated with the narrative self. 

Now, insofar as Ascription involves induction from one's experience of the self, an interesting opportunity for a psychological experiment arises. The studies by Colombatto and Fleming (2024) and Kim *et al*. (2025) show that there is a non-negligible segment of the population who Ascribes to large language models. An LLM's output can be viewed as an ostensible display of a "pure narrative self", for its "self" only consists of a story *qua* textual output. (My view is that this is not a self at all, but this question is outside the scope here.) So we may conjecture that those who are drawn to LLM-Ascription are those whose narrative-self activation is more pronounced than the control group, for such linguistic outputs are what they prominently see in themselves. 

The pilot experiment can be as simple as correlating the results of two surveys: one measuring the importance of narratives, and another measuring the tendency for LLM-Ascription. This can be followed by investigating the neural correlates across self-narrative generation and narrative-driven Ascription. Since Ascription heavily impacts one's moral (and potentially epistemological) attitude towards the Ascribed entity, it might provide an interesting intersection between AI alignment and mindfulness studies.