Title: Magical realism in philosophy of science
Date: 2026-02-26
Category: Philosophy

Philosophers of science are mostly divided into two camps, *realists* and *anti-realists*. Roughly speaking, realists hold that science speaks of unfamiliar entities like electrons because they actually do exist; anti-realists disagree, arguing that the mention of electrons is largely for convenience, and not because there are electrons out there in the world. (Of course, like any position in philosophy, an infinite variety of realism and anti-realism exists in the literature.) I believe both sides of the debate suffer from what I call "magical realism" (apologies to the writers for the mis-appropriation of the term).

Consider the statement "electrons are real". This is a syntactically simple sentence, as it simply asks whether "electron" has a property of "being real". So in order for us to decide whether to assent to this statement, we have to first clarify what "being real" means. Despite its seeming philosophical weight, "being real" is an everyday concept like "being heavy" or "being red", as compared to "being chiral" or "being a virus". For many such concepts, we initially start from pre-theoretical distinctions that we find useful, then proceed to carefully investigate both ourselves and the world, so as to delineate the standards for their use. But "being real" is curiously empty of this depth, compared to "being red" which has led to centuries of colour science. The problem is that the pre-theoretical distinction corresponding to "being real" seems to very closely align with "being reliable" in many cases. Here is a biconditional pseudo-proof for electrons:

1. If we can reliably depend on electrons behaving as advertised, then we are often happy to call them real.
2. If we cannot reliably depend on their behaviour, then we are hesitant to call them real.
3. Therefore, for the most part, electrons are real exactly to the extent that they are reliable.

But philosophers would say that this reasoning is muddled. The classic no-miracles argument states that the reliability of our experiments is a *consequence* of the reality of the posited entities. Yet I find this argument quite baffling, because I do not see what "being real" means here. Perhaps it will help to move to a different language. Suppose that in Andromeda, people have a saying: "Experiments are reliable because things are *blorp*." We ask them why they keep uttering this sentence; they answer that it is only by virtue of *blorp*ness that various experiments work as expected. They point to their versions of televisions, oscilloscopes, and particle accelerators, and explain to us that these are all evidence of *blorp*ness of things. Upon hearing this, how would we understand *blorp*ness? Probably in similar manner as the Chinese *dào*, the mystical principle that keeps the world running. Consequently, we will think "being *blorp*" says more about the Andromedean psychology than it does about the physical world.

Analogously, philosophy's obsession with "being real" is perhaps an artefact of human psychology. This is hinted by what both realists and anti-realists often agree to be real: namely, macroscopic objects such as tennis balls. But there is no fundamental epistemological safety provided by unaided visual detection. Even if we visually detect some tennis balls, they would be pronounced imaginary if we cannot use them in the usual manner, e.g. pick them up and throw them. Also, tennis balls become visually undetectable under extreme temperature, so they are not permanent in any fundamental sense. But under the typical situations that historically drove evolution, detecting and manipulating macroscopic objects were key to survival. Consequently, our mental images of trees and stones have more psychological *oomph* than those of electrons and viruses. And it is difficult to see how "being real" (or "being *blorp*" for Andromedeans) can mean something more than an expression of this *oomph*.

(A hard-nosed philosopher would argue that I am conflating epistemology with ontology here, and that "this tennis ball is real" is a proposition with a definite truth value regardless of how I come to know about it. I admit that such third-person descriptions of the world have comforting coherence, because it makes me feel like I have the "source code" of the world in hand. But confidence in logical harmony, free of empirical tethers, befits theology more than science. As in theology, we cannot prove "from inside" that engaging in it is worthless. But I refuse to participate in it unless I see evidence that it leads to the promised salvation.)

Let us end on a more "poetic" level. We always live under extreme inductive uncertainty from a logical point of view, because nothing can be proven certain about the future. Thankfully, the world has worked in a reasonable manner so far, which has allowed humans to develop a sophisticated model of the world that they can navigate with. But these models always prove to be fragile, for we are just first-person agents in an ephemeral world. By asserting that some furniture of our mental models is *real*, we can treat it as emotional anchors within this uncertainty, although such assertions do no work in refining the models. Both realists and anti-realists treat "being real" as something above and beyond practical reliability, and in doing so, "reality" becomes a magical device that stabilises the impermanence.

More snappily put: Electrons are as real as tennis balls, and "tennis balls" are as instrumental as "electrons".

Postscript: A more satisfactory account of "being real" is provided by Polanyi (1966). Under his view, scientific understanding involves interiorising what is initially external, which in turn requires the investigated particulars to display a certain coherence. So I think there are two tiers of reality in Polanyi's account, although he does not say so explicitly:

- a felt sense of internal coherence in the investigated domain, although this can often be misleading;
- a successful expansion of our body into the domain by making reliable manipulation within it, which can only succeed (in reasonable individuals) when the world complies.

Unlike in the traditional sense, "reality" here is an *active* notion. Chang (2022) makes a similar argument and explicitly names his position *active realism*, although he does not touch upon the enactivism that is latent in Polanyi.

For more information, refer to Hacking, Fine (the "Natural Ontological Attitude"), the American pragmatists, Bridgman, Quine, and some more, all of whom I should have cited if this were a proper article. 