Title: Can you say that sprinting is pornographic?
Date: 2026-02-15
Category: Philosophy

Every two years, the Olympics games come and go with their proud nationalistic spirit and disciplines you forgot existed. While I will not name names, I confess that I find some of the disciplines to be terribly pointless. (Just to pre-empt: I don't think sprinting is pointless, just potentially pornographic.) While I was mulling on this pointlessness, a rather different thought struck me: Many disciplines are not entirely unlike pornography. So I looked up which paper has been influential in our thinking about pornography, in order for me to apply it to sprinting. This led me to *Objectification* by Nussbaum (1995). But before I could apply Nussbaum's theory, I sensed some potential holes in how she characterised the different types of objectification. So this post is in two parts. I first describe and analyse Nussbaum's typology, and then move on to sprinting.

Here are Nussbaum's types of objectification, where her definition in italics is followed by my commentary:

1. *Instrumentality: The objectifier treats the object as a tool of his or her purposes.* Nussbaum states that instrumental use of a person is always wrong, with the caveat that one has to use them *primarily* as means to an end for the instrumentality to be problematic. However, while intuitively sensible, it is quite difficult to demarcate exactly which kind of instrumentality is being problematised here. After all, every interaction is primarily instrumental to the extent that they directly satisfy our will to act in those manners. Using a person for physical comfort (as Nussbaum's human-as-pillow example does) seems *a priori* indistinguishable from using them for will satisfaction, so to speak, even when our will satisfaction often depends on altruistic considerations.  
As such, I would argue that the evil of instrumentality is entirely derivative of the evils of the remaining six types of objectification. That is, the demarcation for "primary objectification" lies exactly in the problematic violation of these other types. Even disregarding the above conceptual analysis, I simply could not think of an unethical example that solely satisfies instrumentality but none of the other six failings. A contrived example might be politely begging the richest person in the world for money; but while some may argue that this act is morally wrong, it clearly does not deserve the moral denouncement accrued by the usual examples of instrumental behaviour (i.e. those that actually turn on the other failings).
2. *Denial of autonomy: The objectifier treats the object as lacking in  autonomy and self-determination.* For the reasons of simplicity, let us stick with self-determination; autonomy has difficult Kantian connotations. My definition of self-determination is the capacity to align the self's future with their will, within the natural physical limits. I think the denial of self-determination is completely decomposable into the presumption of inertness (3) and denial of subjectivity (7), as we will see below. Some might argue that paternalism represents a denial of autonomy that does not reduce to these two failures. This may be so, but sincere paternalism may be exactly where we have benign objectification. (Nussbaum also represents the parent-child relationship as exemplifying unproblematic denial of autonomy.)
3. *Inertness: The objectifier treats the object as lacking in agency, and  perhaps also in activity.* If someone is treated as inert, then they are literally powerless to align their future using their will. Hence, they cannot self-determine. This is clearly wrong when applied to humans, because it ignores the clear evidence otherwise: that they can, and would, change the course of events with their will whenever possible.
4. *Fungibility: The objectifier treats the object as interchangeable (a) with other objects of the same type, and/or (b) with objects of other types.* This is a strange one, because interchangeability does not seem morally bad in itself. Nussbaum does not seem to explain why it is bad either. Furthermore, all human relationships start by being fungible. Someone who tells you how unique you are, on the very first meeting, is probably trying to recruit you for a cult. So what is perhaps problematic here is the *lack of potential* for non-fungibility, like the evil factory owner who never tries to learn their workers' names. But then, why is *that* neglect bad in itself? I think the intuition derives from denial of subjectivity (7). While there is no *a priori* fault with fungibility, the refusal to develop relationships into non-fungible encounters betrays the refusal to treat the other person with the full individuality that one grants oneself. Even though fungibility is thus reducible, I think the perpetually transactional attitude of the factory owner provides a more visible diagnostic for moral failure arising from denial of subjectivity. 
5. *Violability: The objectifier treats the object as lacking in boundary integrity, as something that it is permissible to break up, smash, break into.* The statement uses the term "permissible", which immediately raises the question: who *can* give the permit? The boundary-holder should be able to do so, insofar as they have the right to self-determination. (Consider the euthanasia debate, for example.) So it seems that the problematic quality of violability just collapses to that of denying self-determination. Of course, we perceive intuitive uneasiness when imagining the violation of physical boundaries, regardless of whether permission is granted or not. But the underlying reason appears to be because many real-life examples involve pain or irreversible outcomes. The first is often considered to be a *sui generis* evil that lies outside the issue of objectification; the latter is problematic because it restricts the self-determination of the future self. But similarly to fungibility (4), despite the reducibility *qua* moral fault, the tendency to violate others' boundaries is helpful as a symptom for moral diagnosis.
6. *Ownership: The objectifier treats the object as something that is owned by another, can be bought or sold, etc.* "Ownership" is more of a social construct; I can claim ownership of your house, but it only means something when the rest of the society decides to honour it. So it is very awkward to say that the objectifier literally treats the object as being ownable. (And Nussbaum is not primarily concerned with how societies can objectify individuals.) Of course, we often say that someone is possessively about their partner. But I think this is mostly a figure of speech, i.e. a shorthand for denying rightful self-determination. 
7. *Denial of subjectivity: The objectifier treats the object as something whose experience and feelings (if any) need not be taken into account.* There are two separate issues here. One can flat out deny that the other has subjective consciousness, or acknowledge its existence but consider it unworthy of consideration. In the first case, there is no will for the person to which they can align their futures. So for the objectifier, the question of moral duty towards to the objectified does not rise at all. In the second case, they may either deny that the others' subjectivity leads to any moral obligation, or believe themselves to be neglecting the obligation. All three possibilities seem morally wrong, for they presuppose a narcissistic worldview where they are privileged above other human beings.

So the upshot is that the failures of objectification arise in three fundamental ways:

1. From inertness: The inductive failure of not inferring the agency from their actions. The action of some colonialists against natives reveals this type of failure. 
2. From denial of subjectivity: The modelling failure of not attributing subjectivity to others.
3. Again from denial of subjectivity: The "purely moral failure" of not considering others' subjectivity.

While the first two failures can genuinely arise from a lack of capacity, for typical people they mostly arise from wilful ignorance or compartmentalisation. 

Despite this reduction, Nussbaum's full typology is still useful for capturing moral failures at a macroscopic level when they occur, as I mentioned above. Indeed, these fundamental failures may be more difficult to directly detect in practice, for no reasonable person readily admits that they view other people as totally lacking subjectivity. For example, Nussbaum argues that *Playboy* is morally bad because it represents its women as fungible and ownable, although I assume the magazine never outwardly presents them as something less than human. Yet the *fundamental* underlying moral failure of *Playboy* is that the women are presented as mere reflections of the *readers'* wills and not those of the women. As such, I submit that the magazine most represents the second (cognitive) failure. 

Interestingly, Nussbaum does not consider whether the *Playboy* models are treated with full human respect outside the shooting; she restricts her attention to how the women are represented within the magazine. But many critics of pornography point to the contexts surrounding its production, e.g. the economic coercion that forces the women to perform. So let us consider Olympic sprinting at both levels. As with *Playboy*, there are the outward symptoms and what I perceive to be underlying moral failures. The former can be easily listed, where the first three points pertain to the event and the rest to the pipeline:

1. For many viewers, the participants are totally fungible. What matters to them is whether a competent sprinter happens to be representing one's country; as long as they have a shot at the podium, it does not matter *who* that sprinter happens to be. And even when they win a medal, the names are soon forgotten after the event. Usain Bolt, with all due respect, would not have gathered a following if he never won gold medals. 
2. Sprinting, as an act, is inherently about suppressing one's individuality. You can only win by ruthlessly optimising every aspect of your action. Of course, all work has constraints; a surgeon cannot be baking pancakes in the operating theatre. But even in those fields, constrained creativity is highly valued, and is what separates the good from the elite. However, no such opportunities are granted to a sprinter, where the conditions for running never change to a meaningful degree. (The "individual style" of a sprinter is mostly derived from the physical idiosyncrasies that they cannot change.)
3. A sprinter presents the viewers with a single item: the time measured at the end of the race. Anything else is officially outside the remit of the sprinter. Within the act, the sprinter becomes a simple tool for serving that number.
4. Sprinters are implicitly treated with lower bodily integrity than other citizens. People are fully aware that the level of training endured by Olympics sprinters often leads to permanent physical damage. But while that knowledge would suffice to suspend the activity in most contexts, such damage is considered acceptable for sprinters, and is even valorised.
5. Many start from an age where most agree that no life-changing consent can be given, so there is no meaningful latitude for self-determination.
6. Since tax money is often used to train them, many citizens have a sense of ownership over the athletes. They become irritated when an athlete suddenly quits for no good reason, especially if they were a contender.

As such, it is plausible that Olympic sprinting violates more objectification criteria than most forms of pornography. But unlike *Playboy* where people are treated as vessels for the viewers' imaginations, we do not fantasise while watching the sprinters. In contrast, we are solely interested in the concrete results; the problem is that our relationship with the sprinter is *absolutely* restricted to these results. I argue that this represents an *inductive* failure, but of a subtler kind than that which underlay colonisers' inhuman treatment of natives. The inertness of the sprinters---although it sounds like a contradiction in terms---arises because we expect a total sacrifice of their agency for the sake of the result. This contrasts with activities that have greater environmental variabilities, where we expect the participants to *apply* their agency to solve the problem at hand. It is telling that any account of inventiveness in sprinting comes from the scientists who discover new optimisation techniques, but never from the sprinters; and the scientists must treat the sprinter as a passive object to be studied and tweaked.

The end result is that the sprinter is expected to *strive* in their surrender of agency, in every moment of their lives. No one will claim that these sprinters lack agency or subjectivity in the general sense; but the inductive failure arises because Olympic sprinting is really a job like any other, but we ignore that its participants should thus be accorded the same human standards of moral consideration as others. (Compare this state of affairs to the factory worker on an assembly line, where the surrender of agency is expected to be confined within the physical boundaries of the factory.) The abnormality of the expectations we have for sprinters is largely obscured by the quasi-religious subtext that surrounds the Games. In particular, this aura conveniently helps to conceal the absolute majority of young athletes who *surrender but fail*, and are thrown off the pipeline with permanent injuries and no transferable skills.

Despite it all, I do not claim that Olympic sprinting represents a unique evil in the world. However, under the criteria given by Nussbaum, we should say that it *objectifies* as much as pornography does. And insofar as the moral depravity of pornography consists in its objectification of people to their bodies, we may say that sprinting is pornographic.

Postscript. Ironically, one can argue that a person X becomes truly objectified only when other people chip in and claim that X is being objectified on theoretical grounds; it ignores the lived reality of X over its intellectual abstraction. So I apologise to the sprinters; I just saw a fun provocative opportunity that reveals the potential absurdity of the existing discussion.